ECH extensions added to the main SSLKEYLOGFILE spec (#17)
martinthomson/sslkeylogfile: draft-ietf-tls-keylogfile.md

schedule.  Use of this format could complement other protocol-specific logging
such as QLOG {{?QLOG=I-D.ietf-quic-qlog-main-schema}}.

> This document also specifies an extension to the SSLKEYLOGFILE format to support the
> logging of information about Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) {{!ECH=I-D.ietf-tls-esni}}
> related secrets. This enables debugging of ECH-enabled TLS and DTLS connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document also defines labels that can be used to log information
about exchanges that use Encrypted Client Hello (ECH) {{!ECH=I-D.ietf-tls-esni}}.
```

## Secret Labels for TLS 1.3 {#labels}

An implementation of TLS 1.3 produces a number of values as part of the key
schedule (see {{Section 7.1 of !TLS13}}). If ECH was successfully negotiated for a

> given connection, these labels MUST be followed by Random from Inner ClientHello.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
given connection, these labels MUST be followed by the Random from the Inner ClientHello.
```

> Otherwise, Random from Outer ClientHello MUST be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the Random from the Outer ClientHello MUST be used.
```

An implementation of TLS 1.2 {{!TLS12}} (and also earlier versions) use the
label "CLIENT_RANDOM" to identify the "master" secret for the connection.

## Secret Labels for ECH

With ECH {{!ECH}}, additional secrets are derived
during the handshake to encrypt the Inner ClientHello message using Hybrid Public
Key Encryption (HPKE) {{?RFC9180}}. A client can log the ECH labels described below
if it offered ECH regardless of server acceptance. The server can log the labels only if it
successfully decrypted the ECH offered by the client, though it could choose to do so
only when it accepts ECH.

These labels MUST always use the Random from the Outer ClientHello.

ECH_SECRET:

> : This label corresponds to the KEM shared secret used by HPKE (`shared_secret` in the algorithms in {{Section 5.1.1 of !HPKE=RFC9180}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: This label corresponds to the KEM shared secret used by HPKE
  (`shared_secret` in the algorithms in {{Section 5.1.1 of !HPKE=RFC9180}}).
```

An implementation of TLS 1.2 {{!TLS12}} (and also earlier versions) use the
label "CLIENT_RANDOM" to identify the "master" secret for the connection.

## Secret Labels for ECH

> With the introduction of ECH {{!ECH}} additional secrets are derived

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With ECH {{!ECH}}, additional secrets are derived
```

during the handshake to encrypt the Inner ClientHello message using Hybrid Public

> Key Encryption (HPKE) {{?RFC9180}}. The client SHOULD log the ECH labels described below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key Encryption (HPKE) {{?RFC9180}}. A client can log the ECH labels described below
```

> if it offered ECH regardless of server acceptance. The server MAY log the labels only if it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if it offered ECH regardless of server acceptance. The server can log the labels only if it
```

> successfully decrypted and accepted ECH offered by the client. The client MUST NOT log

Reviewer: ```suggestion
successfully decrypted the ECH offered by the client, though it could choose to do so
only when it accepts ECH.
```

> the labels for connections that use the GREASE ECH extension (see Section 6.2 of {{!ECH}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Not sure if I follow this. I thought asking implementors not to pollute SSLKEYLOGFILE with imaginary artifacts from grease is a good thing, no?

Reviewer: There isn't a secret or config to log when greasing, so why would it be logged?

Author: I've checked few implementations and indeed they are generating GREASE without creating any ephemeral secrets. Which makes perfect sense of course. Thanks for pointing this out!

> These labels MUST be always followed by Random from Outer ClientHello.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These labels MUST be always use the Random from the Outer ClientHello.
```

Author: Resolved with https://github.com/tlswg/sslkeylogfile/pull/17/commits/b69fe526d2a0a01359b1c3f680e74efaa4a90ddd

ECH_SECRET:

> : This label corresponds to the KEM shared secret derived during the HPKE key schedule process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: This label corresponds to the KEM shared secret used by HPKE (`shared_secret` in the algorithms in {{Section 5.1.1 of !HPKE=RFC9180}}.
```

  Length of the secret is defined by the KEM negotiated for use with ECH.

ECH_CONFIG:

> : This label is used to log the ECHConfig used for construction of the ECH extension. The
>   value is logged in hexadecimal representation, similarly to other entries in the SSLKEYLOGFILE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: The ECHConfig used to construct the ECH extension. The value is logged
  in hexadecimal representation.
```

of connections for which secrets are logged could represent a privilege
escalation attack.  Implementations that enable logging also need to ensure that
access to logged secrets is limited, using appropriate file permissions or

> equivalent access control mechanisms. To minimize the risk of accidental activation
> in production, implementers SHOULD incorporate appropriate compile-time controls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
equivalent access control mechanisms.
```

Separate pull request for this if you want to add it.  I don't think we need it either way, but I'm happy to discuss it.

Author: This was based on comments on the list from adoption call. Happy to drop it as I believe this kind of thing heavily depend on implementation details.

Reviewer: Yeah, this is just unnecessary and a little weird.  We don't tell people how to structure their code in specifications.

existing "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Parameters" registry page.
This new registry reserves labels used for SSLKEYLOGFILE entries.
The initial contents of this registry are as follows.

| Value | Description | Reference |
| --- | --- | --- |
| CLIENT_RANDOM | Master secret in TLS 1.2 and earlier | This document |
| CLIENT_EARLY_TRAFFIC_SECRET | Secret for client early data records | This document |
| EARLY_EXPORTER_MASTER_SECRET | Early exporters secret | This document |
| CLIENT_HANDSHAKE_TRAFFIC_SECRET | Secret protecting client handshake | This document |
| SERVER_HANDSHAKE_TRAFFIC_SECRET | Secret protecting server handshake | This document |
| CLIENT_TRAFFIC_SECRET_0 | Secret protecting client records post handshake | This document |
| SERVER_TRAFFIC_SECRET_0 | Secret protecting server records post handshake | This document |
| EXPORTER_SECRET | Exporter secret after handshake | This document |
| ECH_SECRET | HPKE KEM shared secret used in the ECH | This document |
| ECH_CONFIG | ECHConfig used for construction of the ECH | This document |

New assignments in the "SSLKEYLOGFILE Labels" registry will be administered by IANA through

> IETF Review procedure {{!RFC8126}}.

Reviewer: I'm going to start a thread on this.  I think that we should instead go for Specification Required, with experts advised to reject registrations for secrets that can be used to derive other secrets (other than _TRAFFIC_SECRET_0, that should be unnecessary).
